Sentiment Analysis: DAN, BPE, and Skip-Gram

This project implements various neural architectures for sentiment classification on movie reviews, including Deep Averaging Networks (DAN) and Byte Pair Encoding (BPE) for subword tokenization. It also includes a conceptual analysis of the Skip-Gram word embedding model.

Prerequisites
Python 3.6+

PyTorch

scikit-learn

tqdm

matplotlib (for plotting BOW results)

To install dependencies:

Bash
pip install torch sklearn tqdm matplotlib
Running the Models
You can run the different experiments using the --model flag in main.py. All models are configured to print training progress and development set accuracy.

1. Bag of Words (Baseline)
To run the simple discrete Bag-of-Words models (2-layer and 3-layer NN):

python main.py --model BOW

2. Deep Averaging Network (DAN) - GloVe Initialized
Runs the DAN model using pre-trained 50d GloVe embeddings.

python main.py --model DAN

3. DAN with Random Initialization
Runs the DAN model where word embeddings are initialized randomly and trained from scratch (Part 1b).

python main.py --model DAN_RANDOM

4. Subword DAN (BPE)
Runs the DAN model using Byte Pair Encoding for subword tokenization. This model trains its own subword embeddings from scratch (Part 2).

python main.py --model SUBWORDDAN


Project Structure: 

main.py: The entry point for all experiments. Handles data loading and the training loop.

DANmodels.py: Contains the PyTorch implementations for DAN (GloVe), DANRandom, and the SentimentDatasetDAN.

bpe.py: Contains the BPE merge logic, BPETokenizer, and the DAN_BPE model architecture.

BOWmodels.py: Contains baseline Bag-of-Words neural models.

sentiment_data.py & utils.py: Utility scripts for data reading and indexing.

Summary of Results (Report Highlights)

DAN (GloVe): Achieved 79.8% peak dev accuracy. Pre-trained vectors allow for extremely fast convergence (within 10 epochs).

DAN (Random): Achieved 78.8% peak dev accuracy. While competitive, it requires more epochs to converge and shows higher volatility.

Subword DAN (4000 merges): Achieved 77.4% peak dev accuracy. It manages a significant reduction in vocabulary size while maintaining performance above the project requirements.